this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
i would like if i may
to take you
on a strange journey
did you know that there were queer
characters and not just villains in
pre-haze code hollywood meaning the long
long ago hollywood for the uninitiated
however there was only a brief window of
time between the end of the silent film
era in 1929 and the institution of the
morally restrictive haze code in 1934
for them to exist in any real form but
as you'll know if you've watched
any of my other videos filmmakers
managed to sneak in queerness despite
the best efforts of the morally boring
conservatives of the time they just had
to be sneaky about it they couldn't
exactly show two men kissing but they
inserted their queer sensibilities into
these productions sensibilities that
became lovingly known
as camp
oh
i'm a man well nobody's perfect
the gays had always been drawn to the
film industry and the divas who fed it
though you can't make a video talking
about mommy dearest without highlighting
some of her more
unflattering qualities joan crawford is
indicative of this as one of the only
actresses to survive the transition from
silent films to what were referred to as
the talkies get it because moving
pictures or movies and then
they had it sound so they were talking
pictures
talkies joan crawford probably became
the archetype of the hollywood movie
star
and the gays loved her for it because
she exemplified this strong femininity
she drew a massive fandom of gay men
which to her credit in an era when
admitting gay people could even exist
would tank your career and even get you
arrested joan
openly supported the queer people who
supported her granted when it comes to
gays flocking to women who act as icons
some things never change joan yes her
rival betty davis judy garland catherine
hepburn mae west and well all the other
old school hollywood actresses you've
actually heard of ask cher
the gays can keep people around i
suppose in this era of mid-century queer
discrimination civic mistrust and
institutional persecution we needed a
way to propagate our culture unlike
other communities queer ones are
non-hereditary we are not usually born
into them because even if gay people did
manage to raise a child there was no
guarantee that the child would be queer
itself so film was an easy way to
propagate the values of our community to
future generations legends within the
community often suffered a tragically
short lifespan even before the aids
epidemic having joan crawford epitomize
poise and independence on the silver
screen in spite of not being a straight
white man
offered a method of cultural continuity
for us probably in a similar way that
ancient cultures used figures of myth to
propagate a cultural identity to new
generations of illiterate villagers but
how did gay people of the 20th century
choose the myths that they did
there were no shortage of films out
there of those films why did we
gravitate towards such a select few
what was the criteria for holding these
up as relics to pass down to baby queers
with lesbians there was a bit of a
different process
writers who were usually men were so
clueless about writing women that they
often accidentally wrote two friends
being so close that it crossed into
saffic territory for which again enter
joan crawford but if that logic applied
to straight men
why are any number of westerns not held
up by the gays
because these cowboys often got
very close and vulnerable with each
other instead
we gravitated toward a very specific
iteration of femininity
in very specific films
[Music]
all about eve is a perfect place to
start like i said not the first queer
icon movie but one of the first you may
hear referenced a drag queen may refer
to someone as an eve harrington and you
may not know what that means but what
they're doing is accusing someone of
putting on a pleasant face while being a
backstabbing social climbing upstart
who's using more established figures to
launch their own reputation kind of like
a gold digger but instead of money they
seek fame and recognition and she
chooses to latch on to marco channing
played by the betty davis margot is the
queen of the new york theater scene and
even in her 40s is still the highest
regarded stage actress in the city eve
harrington is a poor girl who attends
every performance she can of margo's
current show karen richards margot's
best friend and wife of the show's
playwright spies eve on one of these
nights and invites her to meet margot in
her dressing room eve is introduced as
an avid fan and captivates margot with
stories of her past of love heartbreak
sorrow and pure unadulterated love for
the theater margot brings eve on as a
kind of informal personal assistant
something eve seems all too eager to do
waiting hand and foot on margot's whims
and it's not hard for eve to enchant
almost everyone in margot's inner circle
karen her husband lloyd and margot is
engaged to be engaged boyfriend and
director bill sampson as far as broadway
goes this friend group is royalty what a
coincidence that the young and sweet and
entirely unassuming eve harrington
managed to elbow her way in the only one
who thinks that the numbers aren't
adding up is margo's maid bertie coonan
who's there to be a good emotional
support poor and call eve out for being
a fake [ __ ] and soon margot descends
into a fit of assumed paranoia regarding
the young eve she nearly breaks up with
bill she alienates lloyd who
specifically writes plays for her and
threatens her entire career she's become
convinced that eve is trying to take her
stardom away from her
and though it sounds paranoid she's
entirely correct and eve's true
motivations eventually become clear when
eve does an interview she says some
particularly shady things directed at
margot and so while eve is playing her
game of thrones karen begins to mend
some of the tension between margot and
herself margot also finally accepts
bill's proposal and the grown-ups begin
to get their [ __ ] together eve does keep
her talons gripped and karen's husband
lloyd though who's one of the most
highly regarded playwrights in new york
city she's after a starring role that
was written for margot
which she feels will be her ticket to
stardom all she needs to do
is find a way to push margot out of the
role so as one does eve blackmails karen
to get her husband to steal the part
away from margot and give it to her and
when the film ends
eve harrington the darling pariah
celebrates her tony win
for the part she stole from margot now
exhausted in her condominium she
encounters a mild-mannered young lady
who absolutely idolizes her who offers
to wait on eve hand and foot
and eve too caught up to notice that
history is repeating itself right in
front of her eyes
accepts her offer all about eve is
considered one of the greatest films
ever made it bags six academy awards out
of a total of 14 nominations a record it
still holds to this day including best
picture director cinematography and
screenplay it's also the only film in
history to get four women nominated for
acting roles including one of davis's
most infamous oscar snubs for additional
trivia this is also one of marilyn
monroe's first films a very small role
granted but she makes an impact while
there are comedic elements to the film
especially margot's biting shade
this is a
very highly regarded dramatic film and
yet we can see elements of this plot
being played out in modern farces that
are so over the top that they can be
considered beyond camp hell you might
see a plot line like this showing up on
a season of real housewives but that
isn't to say that this model of story
doesn't turn heads in a good way even to
this day 2010's black swan also more or
less followed the story of a young
performer latching onto the success of
an established star to catapult her own
career so it's not like the plot itself
is tainted but it does take a very
steady hand to keep the format from
descending into a catfight and all about
eve is definitely not the only diva
fight story out there especially if you
want to swap actress for goddess there
are any number of greek plays and myths
about goddesses destroying lives over
petty disagreements and are actresses
not
modern day goddesses worshipped at the
altar of the tabloid rack the gay appeal
of all about eve is likely a combination
of a few things primarily the script
written by joseph bankowitz who wrote
enough shade into the film to put oscar
wilde to shame come to think of it the
film does share a number of very wildean
elements on top of characters who spar
with wit there's a discourse on age and
aging that leans toward an almost
vilification of youth and those who
venerate youth but the film would be
nothing without george saunders anne
baxter and of course betty davis to
carry the film's demand for sharp minds
davis herself had a very substantial gay
following a staunch ally in her private
life and at times even an outspoken one
referring to gays as her friends when
confronting president ronald reagan
about his administration's inaction
during the aids crisis davis herself
was in no small part responsible for
helping screen acting depart from its
origins of theatrical acting whereas in
the theater an actor would project their
acting to the back of the room actions
were grand and bold and lions were
delivered clearly and methodically davis
was more natural and for this reason
whenever davis was in a film it was like
she was acting in an entirely different
movie from everyone else she was one of
the first actors to really dive into
presenting a character with the kind of
naturalism you couldn't really project
on stage
which nothing exemplifies this more than
acting opposite joan crawford in 1962's
whatever happened to baby jane probably
one of the most foundational films
of modern gay culture
[Music]
parodies of this have been done over and
over again to the point where you hear
the name and you hear the premise and
you likely think it's this exploitation
comedic camp romp that may compare to a
telenovela you'd be partially right
because it did kick off the hag
exploitation trend that carried crawford
through her late career in hollywood
high exploitation was a particular
subset of horror that was built on
hollywood's disdain for older women
where women of a certain age are
portrayed as horrifying monsters simply
because of their birthday but this genre
in subversive fashion accidentally gave
these women some of the best roles of
their later careers but as the
progenitor of high exploitation whatever
happened to baby jane is so much more
than the genre it created it tells the
story of baby jane hudson played again
by betty davis and blanche hudson played
by the infamous joan crawford more on
her later formerly famous sisters living
in their twilight years the film has two
sequences which we can see as prologues
in the first we see baby jane at the
center of a stage performing a song and
dance show for a riveted crowd her
father her manager and songwriter
prefers to redirect attention from jane
to himself as indicated later on in the
film where we see that all of the songs
he wrote for jane were about her daddy
off stage blanche longs for her moment
in the spotlight in the second prologue
the women are both making their way
through hollywood a producer remarks
that jane hudson can't act to save her
life but they're stuck casting her see
blanche is their golden starlet a
talented actress who can sell tickets
like none other and she's got it in her
contract that for every film she does
the studio must also cast jane in
another we then see a nighttime scene
where presumably one of the hudson girls
tries to murder the other by crushing
her between a car and the driveway gate
the audience is led to believe that it
was a resentful jane who drove into
blanche and left her paraplegic and
bedridden for the rest of her life the
film itself follows the progression of
these sisters in their later life
blanche's old films have gone on to
television and jane is none too pleased
with her particular lot in life taking
care of her sister hand and foot every
time blanche hits a blood-curdling
buzzer
[Music]
the plot revolves around jane learning
that blanche is trying to sell their
house with no clear indication of what
jane will do when presumably left
homeless as a severely alcoholic 60 year
old she plans to take up her old act
again and tour with her old songs for
income of her own and independence from
blanche it goes about as well as you
would assume as blanche gets closer and
closer to selling the house jane begins
to spiral deeper depicted almost as a
slasher serial killer tormenting a
wheelchair-bound sister who can do
nothing to escape her situation jane
is terrifying about halfway through the
film jane's portrayal begins to shift
jane continuously expects people to know
who she is and is a little put off when
people don't recognize her
maybe you remember me
and baby jane
sure at first this feeds into her
portrayal as a monster this arrogant
fame obsessed petty woman who lords her
control over blanche is the only thing
that makes her feel powerful we see jane
and we think that she's out of her mind
that she's entirely convinced that it's
possible to relive her girlhood but as
the film goes on
we get the feeling that she
is
legitimately out of her mind and what we
saw as arrogance is now depicted as a
delusional mental state she does not
want to merely rekindle her youth
she seems entirely unaware that it even
ended
having spent the entire film with her
ghoulish white face and heart-shaped
beauty mark
we see it later on
smudged
we the audience finally see that this
was not a directorial decision but a
component of jane's character every
morning she has been putting on this
white face of makeup and drawing on a
heart onto her cheek
because she is locked in this state of
existence and does not seem able to
escape this is after all the same makeup
she would have worn
under the bright lights of a stage in
fact she begins to regress
acting younger and younger
but there's one problem that just won't
let her be young
oh shut up
just like jane there's a flip for
blanche too
early on we see jane's accusations that
blanche is out to stop jane from living
her life and we agree with blanche's
denial of that because jane seems to be
the villain
and blanche by contrast is sweet and
patient with everyone she interacts with
but more and more we see blanche
extending what control she has over jane
the house after all is in her name
she controls the money she controls
jane's drinking and in a very nonchalant
way does like to remind jane of that and
blanche does in her own way begin to
admit that maybe jane's feelings of
isolation at blanche's insistence aren't
completely unfounded what seems like a
woman afraid for her life and pleading
with her captor
can alternately be seen as a woman who's
pulling out all the stops to placate
someone she's been manipulating for
years see as jane descends further and
further into a childlike delusion
she begins to lose sight of the
consequences of her actions as she
torments blanche
blanche begins to remind jane of her
dependence
and her attempts to escape become bolder
jane responds in kind detaining her
ripping the buzzer from the wall firing
blanche's maid tying blanche to her bed
for days on end with no food and then
murdering the kind maid
when she finds blanche tied up when jane
is found out by the pianist she hired
for her planned upcoming career
resurgence
jane is thrown into a full meltdown for
reasons unknown
she goes to blanche and desperately
pulls her into the car to go to the
beach jane had reminisced about the
beach that she fondly remembers
rehearsing there where people would
circle around to watch her dancing jane
has a wonderful day running around
barefoot playing catch with other
children
and joyfully getting ice cream for her
and her sister while forgetting to pay
all the while
dehydrated malnourished and immobile
blanche
cooks
in the sun blanche does not have much
time left and urges jane to hear a final
confession jane childishly holds her
hands to her ears refusing to hear what
blanche has to say
what she knows is true
and what she had to reject for the last
30 years to survive that it was blanche
behind the wheel of the car that night
and that before the car hit jane she
drunkenly stumbled out of the way
the accident left blanche crippled
and she crawled out from behind the
wheel to make it seem like it was jane
who had tried to kill her and then we
see the film in a different light
this was not about a jealous sister who
resented the others fame and success to
the point of committing torture this was
about a woman who had been gaslit so
severely
that her entire psyche had collapsed
jane was robbed of her childhood by her
father and robbed of her womanhood by
her sister all the while everyone told
her that she was the monster behind
everything and so she turned herself
into that monster retroactively
we learned that jane's feelings and
paranoias were valid all along and that
blanche never really quit acting after
all
acting the part of the victim blanche
had spent 30 years exploiting a
fabricated guilt complex to make a loyal
servant out of jane and as soon as she
had a more pliable willing servant
she was all too ready to completely
discard her sister
jane though a monster nevertheless was a
monster that blanche had created not
entirely unlike us queer folk who are
gaslit into believing we're the broken
ones in a society too broken to accept
us whose parents abandon us
leaving us feeling unloved and unknown
but on the california beach where jane
sits beside blanche
and remarks
to her abuser
all this time we could have been friends
and then the audience is left with this
visceral discomfort for the next few
hours now
like with all about eve it's clear to
see why it would appeal to fem heavy
queer circles it's got all the kind of
meaty feminine things the drag queens
love outrageous personalities women
using duplicity as a weapon old icons
clinging on to past glory pathos in
excess which isn't a half bad definition
of camp actually pathos in excess
finding gravitas in the mundane making
an aristocracy out of the destitute
isolating this house from the rest of
the world
all the politics of culture art and
society matter less than the ability to
navigate the politics of this enclosure
because the fact of the matter is that
both of these women are suffering due to
their father despite having a relatively
small role in the film itself
he left both girls with emotional scars
that would heavily influence their
downfall because while he did manage
jane's career and her youth he also
facilitated blanche's career in
hollywood and while he bought the house
the girls live in there is some question
as to whether he bought it with the
money he made off of jane
or off a blanch make no mistake he did
make the money off of his girls and
something that is true to queer circles
it is so tempting to climb to the top of
the heap
at the bottom of the barrel
even if it means stepping on other
people below you to do it but aside from
plot and themes the film's primary draw
was being able to finally watch joan
crawford and betty davis act against
each other fans flocked to it like it
was the boxing match of the century the
drama around this film hovered like a
miasma when in reality the rivalry
between crawford and davis was played up
even at the time before baby jane their
feud amounted to basically fighting for
the same roles for the past 10 years
that was it and when it comes to the
making of drama yes there was a lot in
fact as per the camp definition of
making much ado about nothing the
behind-the-scenes antics rivaled what
you'd watch in a movie ranging from all
manner of petty things the women did to
piss each other off the studio seeing
the dailies come in seemed to encourage
this animosity among their actresses
producers were worried that if crawford
and davis buried the hatchet during
filming that their characters loathing
of each other wouldn't be as palpable
so like in the film
two women were pitted against each other
by men
so that men could profit off of them but
to me the most interesting thing about
the making of the film is that
yes joan crawford really did pitch this
idea to warner brothers and essentially
single-handedly pulled this project
together maybe foolishly she didn't go
after a producer credit and honestly if
this was the kind of quality she could
assemble
she could have been a trailblazer for
women on the production end of hollywood
instead
crawford was obsessed with being a movie
star
specifically she wanted another oscar or
at least a nomination and she really
thought that she could act the straight
character opposite the woman losing her
mind and get an oscar nomination for
being in a wheelchair for half the movie
she really thought
that that was going to be enough and no
disrespect she did have an oscar by then
however as a typified movie star joan
crawford really only ever played joan
crawford in whatever movie she was in
that's what movie stars are for
they're cast because their personal
brand will fit in a given movie and
that's not to say that movie stars
aren't as good or valuable as character
actors would you rather be julia roberts
or tilda swinton it's not a contest it's
just a different game that said davis
did have a habit of elevating actors she
was in the same room as in instances
like all about eve you can see the cast
beginning to adopt more of davis's
signature style as the film goes on and
become much more natural perhaps to the
benefit of whatever happened to baby
jane joan crawford wasn't a good enough
actress to act through her natural
narcissism crawford making sure that she
was picture perfect for each shot that
the camera caught all her good angles
her emphasis on beauty in spite of being
a shut-in who hadn't seen the sun for 20
years
all of that added an extra layer of
fraudulence to the character jones
natural demeanor bled through and added
to blanche's fraudulent duplicity this
is the value of a movie star
without intending to and perhaps without
realizing it joan elevated an otherwise
benign role and it's because of all
these nuances and subtleties that hag
exploitation became such a hit genre in
the 60s there was a clamor to cash in on
the trope whatever happened to baby jane
with a budget of just under 1 million
dollars grossed 10 million dollars at
the box office which even by today's
standards would be considered an indie
success but in the 1960s
this was a cash cow however as a
progenitor it employed a massive amount
of talent in front of and behind the
camera filmmakers who wanted to innovate
to bring out the thematic elements of
the story it's often the curse of
repetition that people will say i want
to do that thing without realizing what
it was that made that thing so impactful
there's a reason halloween spearheaded
the slasher movie and was never
superseded by the man with a knife
copycats had exploitation was
constructed around old women being shady
and even crazy though whatever happened
to baby jane was a character study on
the cognitive dissonance of long-term
gaslighting the complex relationships of
sisters and constructing a narrative
where truth and illusion are difficult
to discern it all takes a very steady
hand to pull that off without dipping
into farce because you can get all the
cheap thrills you need just by having
women being naughty there does need to
be that element of pathos to really give
something legs though because it is in
the pathos that we the audience can see
ourselves reflected in while there are
few of us who are blanche and or jane
hudson's
we can see the elements of their
relationship and apply it to our own
lives and that's what happened to baby
jane of course it seems to be a pattern
that we're inherently drawn to films
which depict established icons serving
up something new
old dogs learning new tricks only adds
to their legend and from here
we turn from betty davis and joan
crawford and look toward another gay
icon
elizabeth taylor
i'm sure you've heard of her what a dump
[Music]
the same year that whatever happened to
baby jane premiered the world of theater
was shooketh by the premiere of who's
afraid of virginia woolf
which went on to win tony's for best
play and in the acting categories he was
also selected to win a pulitzer prize
though the committee struck down that
decision as the play had
too much profanity the same year who's
afraid of virginia woolf was first
staged
the film cleopatra also hit theaters
another entry in elizabeth taylor's ubra
though unfortunately
cleopatra was a disaster we remember it
now as this kind of
iconic symbol of hollywood opulence
taylor's personal wardrobe budget was
nearly two hundred thousand dollars in
1960. that's about two million dollars
today taylor herself was offered the
part after a very lengthy casting
process and only reluctantly agreed to
do it she highballed the studio for a
contract she thought fox would never go
for and broke a record for being the
first actress to be paid one million
dollars for a single hollywood movie
there's conflicting accounts but she may
have been the first actor period to get
a million dollar salary for a movie
alternately it may have been marlon
brando for mutiny on the bounty but you
know
he sucked a dick or two so he's part of
the club the film took nearly 10 years
to finish and was initially pitched as a
modest 2 million historical fiction
however production was launched during
the peak of hollywood spectacle so the
studio's take on it was that this was a
fabulous time to go big or go home that
two million dollars quickly got inflated
to 31 million dollars anyway artistic
sensibilities shifted in the 1960s
audiences turned away from raw spectacle
and instead preferred more personal
stories
like the graduate easy rider bonnie and
clyde and whatever happened to baby jane
cleopatra's budget was so inflated and
audiences were so disinterested in
spectacle that it nearly tanked 20th
century fox they were only saved by the
rocky horror picture show
more camp look it up it's true and
getting to the point the movie was at
the time said to be the end of elizabeth
taylor's career fast forward to a few
short years later when a screen
adaptation of who's afraid of virginia
woolf was announced and taylor was due
to play the lead critics immediately
scoffed they felt the taylor's movie
star brand clashed with the content of
the play and the tailor herself was too
young to convincingly play a middle-aged
woman but no
taylor really did get on set and eat
that chicken wing on camera she
relentlessly committed to martha it was
uncanny it's worth noting that actors
even in films today do not normally eat
on camera there's usually a cut before
or after giving an actor a chance to
spit out what's in their mouth or
pretend to chew while holding a sandwich
with a bite taken out of it a problem
you know arises if you need to do 10
takes of an actor eating pizza what
happened to you do i look fat liz i had
to eat four slices of pizza on stage at
each performance jenna that's 32 pieces
of pizza a week no that can't be right
the story follows george and martha
which you may hear a gay describe a
given couple as a regular george and
martha not a flattering remark george is
an associate professor and despite his
clear intellect and how long he's taught
at the university and the fact that
martha is the daughter of the university
president he is locked in this lowly
position for reasons not yet known
upon returning home from a faculty
function late at night martha tells
george tired and half drunk that she's
invited a young couple over to have a
drink
george
reluctantly agrees even before the
couple arrives george and martha do
nothing but needle each other to the
point of verbal emotional and physical
abuse it's not particularly clear who is
abusing who
though it does seem that martha is the
instigator when the couple arrives nick
a young professor of biology and his
wife honey george and martha don't stop
needling each other but they begin to be
more subtle about it they verbally
express their enjoyment of playing games
but it's not clear what those games are
as george and martha load up the guests
with drinks
their polite masks begin to crack with a
full argument breaking out when martha
mentions their 16 year old son tahani
again for reasons unknown
nick admits to george that he intends to
sleep his way up the university ladder
saying that he wouldn't mind starting
with martha to george's face which
george just kind of takes in stride
which somehow makes this scene even more
homoerotic than it already was as the
group gets drunker and looser nick gets
flirtier with everybody but his wife as
part of their game martha reveals that
the reason george can't get a promotion
is because he admitted to the university
president that he spent years in a
mental institution for accidentally
killing his parents and that he would
have been blacklisted from all of
academia if it wasn't for martha's
insistence for which
george attacks her after a fatalistic
argument with george martha takes nick
and they have wild drunken sex for which
it's implied that nick actually had a
tough time keeping it up
once again leading to some speculation
about who nick had actually intended to
sleep with to climb that ladder and as a
coup de grace in the game george
kills his and martha's own child twitch
the audience and the house guests are
confused
see
what happened is that the child never
existed
george and martha could not conceive for
unclear reasons and george permitted
martha to make a fantasy child however
due to george's shaky reputation a rule
of this game was that nobody could ever
know about this imaginary child a rule
martha broke when in her drunken
enthusiasm she told honey about him
thereby giving george permission as per
the rules of the game to kill him in a
car accident
straight people and people think wanda
has a weird situation with her kids the
young couple heads home now realizing
what a tangled mess they've gotten
themselves into by choosing an exciting
career in academia a field where people
have too much intellectual energy
without enough to actually do
and george and martha resolve to stay
together because they don't have
anything else but each other but
like all about eve and whatever happened
to baby jane there is more to this than
betty davis joan crawford and elizabeth
taylor dragging their gay fans into
movie seats to watch this film at
gunpoint about damaged heterosexuals on
top of the fact that this is two hours
of shade and a fabulous older woman
getting a studly young man in the sack
there's some back brain gay appeal here
who's afraid of virginia woolf primarily
takes on a critique of social values
namely the performativity of social
expectations both george and martha are
so disillusioned with their lives that
they prefer to develop actual illusions
to exist in
to the extent where they themselves are
unaware
of where the lines are drawn there's
also a whole lot to say about who may
hold the real power in this relationship
to the outside it's a wonder why they
even chose to be together nick certainly
doesn't seem to understand it at first
and questions why martha even chooses to
keep protecting george's career with
that bargaining chip it would seem she
carries the ultimatum to him
she clearly hates george and would do
fine with another man but that's where
he's wrong george
who is out somewhere there in the dark
who is good to me
whom i revile
who can keep learning the games we play
as quickly as i can change them
who can make me happy and i do not wish
to be happy martha may serve as a
protection for george's career but
george as someone who understands the
need to escape a traumatic reality may
be the only person who would allow
martha's illusions to flourish
they have this
tumultuous codependency that they both
hate and yet that they both need to
function
power dynamics for them are like a game
of hungry hungry hippos with infinite
marbles they're both in it to win it
even if winning's impossible even if the
trophy is a few seconds of emotional
superiority it's worth getting dragged
through the mud and so because their
lives are too mundane for their taste
they develop this mutually accepted
environment of games what their games
seem to be as i said are a temporary
emotional victory but also something
deeper
martha is a powerful woman
and given the social climate of the
1960s she may be betting correctly when
she says she won't be able to find
another relationship where she can have
the kind of control that she does but
she also doesn't want some simp that'll
just bend over for her
she wants an equal footing of power and
a romantic dynamic and we do see her
when she is affectionate with george
at least in taylor's performance but
taylor's take on martha is that this is
a woman who
easily becomes bored with a clearly
defined power dynamic she would rather
have her toxic battle with george than
take the risk of looking for something
else that would be more
healthy the gay appeal here is that
whatever happened to virginia woolf
who's afraid of baby jane there's
something about eve baby um gays are
drawn to the eternal struggle of george
and martha because it
typifies a lot of the straight
experiences that we've seen it raises
the question without answering it
are the straights okay because we see
them in these relationships these
marriages these arrangements we see them
fight and scuffle and rush into things
and we see them go through it all
because
i mean it's not really clear if you hate
doing something
why do you do it we see this weird
muscle memory that straight people have
around milestones what your life should
look like by a certain age what age you
have to be to get married to buy your
first house to have kids there's no
clear rule book that says this and yet
to this day there are psychological
expectations which depending upon region
have specific dates and the straights
all know them it's like gays knowing the
lyrics to lady gaga shaiza nobody asked
them nobody said they had to know these
things and yet somehow they all do yet
we tell ourselves
that we are free george and martha
represent what we fear the heterosexual
urge to twist your own arm to be able to
fit a nuclear family ideal
to make concessions of yourself and your
own identity for the sake of fitting
this appearance
and meanwhile
telling everyone around you
that this is just how it's meant to be
inventing toxic games to torment your
spouse constantly pushing boundaries
redefining what the boundaries are and
making up fake rules as red herrings all
to fill that intellectual need to feel
powerful and you take it out on your
spouse because
what are they going to do
break the codependency completely
destroy the both of you marriage offers
no recourse your bank accounts are
together
you're afraid of changing
because you built your life
around this other person you're stuck
that's where you live that's where you
exist there's way too much emotional
baggage wrapped up in the other to just
leave
so why not flex the power you can and
see what broken boundary is just too far
what is divorce if not the safe word for
suburban families when it comes to
george and martha there's no way to win
the game
but if playing the game is pushing the
other one to their limit and either
forcing them to redefine their limit or
give up then giving up
is losing and like the previous films
discussed it's very clear to see how a
story like this could translate into an
almost slapstick first as i said about
steady hands there was an incredible
amount of talent in this production and
there is a reason why
out of the library of gay camp which is
held up on a pedestal
these older entries approach their
subject matter with much more
seriousness than you would get out of a
john waters movie though this list is
not comprehensive these belong to a
group of progenitors
which present these themes as realities
when these movies do well and resonate
with audiences there are going to be a
horde of people who want to recreate
these themes and emotions and many of
these imitation films were forgotten
many simply couldn't go as hard they
were unremarkable or interchangeable and
thus forgettable but some took the
nuance and decided that if they couldn't
match elizabeth taylor then they would
exceed her and thus
the gays redefined what has now become
known as camp
and camp
in turn
redefined us
[Music]
now we're getting into it susan sontag
in her essay notes on camp often cited
as the quintessential document on camp
culture remarks an association between
gays and camp and as she was writing in
the 1960s she was highlighting a very
retroactive depiction from her
upbringing baby jane had only just come
out when this paper was published this
indicates that gay attraction to
overwrought and badly depicted feminine
archetypes was well solidified long
before 1981
when the infamous mommy dearest
premiered the purported true story of
growing up with movie star joan crawford
as a mother through the process of
imitation baby jane cleopatra martha eve
harrington and crawford herself are
imitated here to the point where in faye
dunaway's mind playing joan crawford
this is a perfectly nuanced depiction of
hollywood's archetypal movie star john
waters described mommy dearest as the
first drag queen role played by a woman
and he's not wrong but it seems to be
completely by accident films that are
accidental camp are kind of rare without
clear intent failed camp either goes so
big that it looks cheap and we
disconnect or they don't go big enough
either way we don't make a point of
remembering those movies so when one
does manage to hit the right buttons
we hold onto it for dear life so enter
mommy dearest first published as a book
by christina crawford in 1978 describing
her torturous relationship with her
mother joan one year after jones death
in 1977 the story is about a daughter
who is struggling to reconcile her love
for an abusive parent which
would have made a great movie in no time
at all studios snatched up the rights to
the story and christina herself wrote a
script when faye dunaway was cast in the
lead role riding on her oscar from
1977's network the studio and faye
herself wanted to restructure the script
to center around crawford with faye's
husband who she managed to make a
producer on the film trying to sanitize
joan and christina's husband being
accused of trying to turn joan into a
monster so
what joan did we get the film opens with
dunaway's crawford hollywood queen
musing about how despite her success in
global allure she feels like there's
just
something missing from her life yes her
career is in a bit of a slump but she
isn't as concerned about that because
she thinks that just means that
now is a great time to become a mother
unable to bear children she begins to
suggest the option of adoption to her
then boyfriend and hollywood lawyer greg
savitt who helps her pull the strings
she needs to pull to have an adoption
agency hand her a baby this scene is
played entirely straight by the way this
visual pulls crawford to the center of
attention like a reifenstahl-esque
monarch or idol once again
unnecessary pathos and all this
unnecessary pathos feeds into this lofty
visual language of jones perfection
channeled through dunaway we're only
five minutes in and no it does not slow
down from here the first act of the film
explores the strange power dynamic
between joan and her young daughter
christina this is where most of the
iconic scenes of the movie come from
because this is where joan is depicted
at her most unhinged now how can one of
the most powerful actresses in
hollywood's history have a struggle for
power
with a child
well that's something that critics slam
the script for there isn't really any
textual reason for why joan is such a
terror to her family there's no reason
why joan is triggered at the sight of a
wire hanger or why christopher has to
wear a harness to bed which feeds into
the insanity of this role there are all
of these compulsions but no exploration
as to why the surface level of the
analysis is
out to seemingly use joan to subvert the
expectations of a hollywood star someone
for whom the public lawed as the ideal
of perfection and womanhood though in
reality
is a monster in her private life
when cameras are on she's joan crawford
when they're off she's a woman who is
desperately trying to keep everyone in
line so that she can be joan crawford
already the gays are on board for that
we love expose on fakeness feels like
gossip with substance guilt-free
relating to our personal lives a lot of
queer people in the community come from
families that an outsider would say are
ideal but for those of us who have to
live with our parents homophobic
attitudes that perfection is a little
different behind closed doors parents
often let nasty things slip when they're
away from polite company and that's
doubly complicated because it means
nobody believes you especially nowadays
when bigotry isn't quite so in vogue
parents still do and say homophobic and
transphobic [ __ ] but they do get a
little gas lady about it dare i say
shady i've even heard of situations
especially from trans people where their
own therapists will try convincing them
that they're making up their parents
transphobia however just because there's
no surface reading doesn't mean that
explanations aren't inferred which is
mostly on faye dunaway for sucking up
every drop of attention away from any
deeper analysis look a little deeper
into joan's parenting in christina's
early life and especially joan's
biographical context and you guessed it
there's a commentary about youth
and beauty in multiple instances in
mommy dearest whenever it seems that
christina is coming of age as a lady
jones sees that as competition from
living out a fantasy and the spotlight
to taking a few tricks from joan's own
book on how to flirt with men christina
is a threat
to jones reign christina is both a rival
a symbol of her fading youth a child a
miniature version of joan within whom
she can place all her expectations
and an opportunity to exercise her
authority christina must be better than
joan but also joan must use christina to
prove that she's still at the top of her
game she both pushes christina beyond
what is reasonable to expect of a little
girl and also smugly revels in
christina's failures often resorting to
humiliating christina as a punishment
for either not being perfect or for
seemingly encroaching on jones reign
what are you doing
don't you tell me what i'm doing don't
tell me
mommy
yeah i know you look awful
you'll be quiet you're always rummaging
through my drawers trying to find a way
to make people look at you while you're
always looking at yourself in the mirror
why are you doing that tell me joan is
so fixated on perfection that she can't
handle it when things don't quite fall
into place following several poor
performing films mgm releases joan from
her contract this compiles with a string
of failed romances and triggers a
cascade of joan's greatest fears her
beauty something she felt was her
primary asset
is fading but what terrifies her is that
she does not have the talent to make up
for it in her defense yes mgm was
shafting her as a human being she was
aging but they continued to caster her
roles as if she was the joan crawford
that she was 15 years prior instead of
i don't know letting her play more
mature roles they just cut her loose
because she wasn't ageless joan crawford
it is implied held herself up to
perfection
because she
accurately
assumed that a single slip up
would have her thrown to the dogs and
when that fear was validated we can
expect some erratic behavior which gives
us one of the most iconic scenes in camp
history
so hollywood is an absurd place it's why
movies about hollywood generally don't
click with general audiences because
it's a place like no other so you're
already in absurd territory but instead
of mitigating the absurdity and
explaining the kind of anxieties and
pressure that exist in this place
there's joan
down on the ground
hacking away at roses in a
gorgeous beaded gown and that line
delivery tina
bring me the axe where each word is
punctuated with an entirely distinct and
separate emotion it's a complete sensory
overload and honestly
though the quote gets thrown around fans
of the scene are missing two of the best
parts first the fact that they actually
committed to a wide shot of fey hacking
away at that orange tree in that gown
second joan says bring me the axe the
axe
the
not bring me an axe bring me the axe in
the literal syntactic text of the movie
we can gauge that this is a regular
occurrence at the crawford household
because christina
didn't flinch
and she knew exactly which axe to get
and where to get it
i feel as if the movie had done even the
slightest amount of work to bring out
the aforementioned subtext you could
pull off this exact scene as a harrowing
self-destruction of joan's psyche
reading into it joan feels her perfect
garden must match her internalized
feeling of inadequacy if mgm tells her
that she's not perfect
then there's no point in having anything
perfect around why should something be
more perfect than her if being perfect
was her only value it could be a really
gripping scene the problem is that
without adequate build up or actual
exploration of joan's emotions
instead with dunaway opting to depict
these emotions as mood swings this scene
comes out of nowhere it's also worth
mentioning that this film doesn't really
follow a narrative we go from jones
celebrating her long-awaited oscar win
and the winner is
john crawford
directly into
no
wire hi guys ever
which again
could be a legitimately terrifying scene
if there was any kind of narrative
consequentialism that said when it comes
to abusive households there's usually
this soft reset button at the end of the
episode where there's an unspoken
agreement to leave it in the past at
least when it involves younger children
which in and of itself
is a really eerie and unsettling concept
though mommy dearest does absolutely
nothing to establish this precedence
with spoken or visual language and no
the abuse does not end with jones
shipping christina off to boarding
school which it is implied joan was
doing because she observed her daughter
beginning to experiment with flirting
not on her watch when christina is
caught kissing a boy at the school she's
reprimanded by the administration but
joan insists that she be expelled for
some reason and instead pulls christina
out of the school now as it turned out
beyond just kissing boys christina ended
up quite enjoying her time away from her
mother at the boarding school
and given that the discipline obsessed
joan originally intended private school
to be a punishment
enjoying a punishment
is also something that will not happen
on her watch leading to
another iconic scene joan
barba please
please barbara
bringing christina home as she has an
interview schedule joan coyly if not
proudly remarks that christina was
expelled after telling christina not to
talk about the expulsion i can't think
of a single parent who would gloat about
their child's expulsion
but to joan it's almost like a victory a
failure for a rival is a victory for her
christina points out to the reporter
that she was not in fact expelled twitch
joan throws a fit over being accused of
lying even though
she was lying why do you deliberately
defy me why did you tell her i got
expelled because you did get expelled
that
is a lie
when christina calls her out joan just
goes right on and slaps her in front of
the reporter and then blames her for
making her embarrass herself in front of
the reporter you
you deliberately embarrass me in front
of a reporter
joan begins to spiral aimlessly with
such and such parental insults about
gratitude but it seems like christina's
done with this song and dance and asks
why joan bothered to adopt her if joan
didn't seem to want anything to do with
christina why did you adopt me
maybe i did it for a little extra
publicity
tensions rise and
why can't you treat me
i would be treated by any stranger on
the street
because i am not
one of your fans
and now we're getting into the territory
of christina's accounts that can be
backed up by fact fact number one
is that yes joan really did replace
christina on a soap opera
that christina was cast in joan in her
60s takes the role of a 28 year old
woman while christina is recovering from
a benign ovarian tumor fact number two
is another iconic scene joan crawford
was on the board of directors for
pepsico via her husband the company was
a nothing upstart to compete with the
behemoth that was coca-cola joan was
brought on as a brand ambassador and
basically made the company into what it
was joan married the ceo and the board
of directors did try to force her out
after his death in the film this
encounter is depicted with jones
screaming into the boardroom famously
saying dude with me fellas and though
this is a famous line from the film it's
not the line that was lifted from the
secretary's notes at the meeting but
joan did say to the directors i fought
worse monsters than you for years in
hollywood i know how to win the hard way
ironically this is one of dunaway's more
understated lines in the entire film
this meeting in reality was much more
cordial than dunaway delivered why did
it need to get turned up to an 11
why not that's why rounding off the film
is the reading of joan crawford's will
with christina and christopher when it
comes to what joan left them joan writes
that they will receive nothing
reasons which are well known
to them
which was the literal reading of the
will
that happened that's the last thing
christopher and christina ever heard
from their mother and when asked
apparently neither of them
know what those reasons were there are
some suggestions that joan wrote them
out of the will because she heard
christina was already writing mommy
dearest while joan was alive but that
doesn't explain why she nicks
christopher the film doesn't even
mention jones younger two children who
she adopted just about the same time
that christina went off to boarding
school funny timing that now as with all
great camp movies half of the fun is the
gossip and the making of mommy dearest
is no exception as mentioned mommy
dearest was a celebrity expose
christina's account is a pain-tormented
struggle between loving her mother and
recalling good memories of joan but also
living through some
very traumatic abuse and behavior though
the way hollywood figures talk about it
especially those who are close to joan
even betty davis herself christina makes
joan out to be a demon
that she wasn't who's one of the worst
people you know in hollywood
that i worked with or that you wouldn't
want to work with again if you don't you
don't have one one million dollars fade
down away but the book is much tamer
especially if your frame of reference is
the movie and honestly a lot of the
vitriol that gets slung at christina is
well i never saw joan beat her children
i never saw this happen well i never saw
harvey weinstein rape anybody which
you'd think in this post me too believe
victim society that excuse wouldn't fly
but christina to this day has haters i
think christine was very very envious
of joan crawford and her public and her
popularity and her beauty hollywood is
said to be a small town and the vitriol
directed at christina may simply be them
protecting one of their own christina
does make a point of specifically
blaming hollywood for crafting jones
narcissism before the fall of the studio
system the studios themselves would mold
their stars into fitting specific
personality ideals to put on airs not
only for cameras but for fans in private
it was rare that you'd get a star like
davis or katherine hepburn who didn't
bother with the facade this is apparent
in a documentary called bright lights
starring carrie fisher and debbie
reynolds
may they rest in peace reynolds while
being interviewed still had her
signature debbie reynolds charm however
the documentary crew kept the cameras
rolling when carrie took her aside from
around the corner
debbie's voice is much weaker and more
vulnerable
even though she was a woman in her 80s
debbie reynolds was a mask she had to
wear for the public luckily she did have
a supportive family with whom she didn't
have to wear it christina's take seems
to be that jones simply wasn't able to
take that mask off at all
and resorted to drastic behavior
when the porcelain started to crack but
with all the hatred toward the story and
toward christina
it does boggle my mind that hollywood
was so horny to get this movie made as
soon as the book came out you couldn't
find anyone who had anything good to say
about it
faye dunaway herself agreed to play the
role as long as it was more respectful
to jones memory
than the book
though christina's book was obviously an
exploitation book the first one of its
kind
my task was to portray a woman a full
woman
who she was in all her facets
not just one
i tried to illuminate who this woman was
but it was more than just about being
angry it was about trying to examine and
explore the forces that undermined her
i don't think faye and i watched the
same movie christina actually did not
feel that dunaway's performance
accurately depicted her mother
specifically claiming that dunaway's
depiction of joan was far more monstrous
than she ever experienced is that
anywhere near the way joan crawford
actually acted
only the makeup faye dunaway
specifically went out of her way to
manipulate the script the director and
producers to humanize joan all the while
lambasting the book as tabloid drivel
only for the author of that drivel
to decry the performance for depicting a
monster it also didn't help that dunaway
was already kind of a diva
once again ironically joan crawford was
quoted saying of all the actresses to me
only faye dunaway has the talent and the
class and the courage it takes to make a
real star
dunaway later blamed mommy dearest for
hurting her career and given that she
was a bit of a hot ticket actress before
the 80s she was forced into roles in
smaller films for the rest of her life
and on one hand you may say it's because
of her performance but plenty of actors
have had bad roles maybe nothing so
monumental is this but fey was a bit of
a
hassle you see on top of being a prima
donna in general she allegedly
terrorized the set of mommy dearest for
starters she refused to drop out of
character during production so on top of
delivering
that on camera
the crew and cast had to live with that
for weeks routania alda who played jones
assistant in the film wrote a
behind-the-scenes memoir about the
filming experience she wrote people
despised faye because she was rude to
people everyone was on pins and needles
when she worked and relaxed when she
didn't to name a few things faye
allegedly manipulated the director to
rob other actors of their screen time to
pull it to herself she also insisted
that people on set needed to turn away
from her while she was performing
because
she didn't want an audience
regarding her method acting and will
avoid a discussion about what method
acting really is and how a lot of actors
misuse the term dunaway had the usual
nonsense to say but with an extra twist
if your mind is on a woman who is dead
and you're trying to find out who she
was and do right by her
you do feel a presence
i felt it at home at night sometimes
it wasn't pleasant
i felt joan was not at rest so i think
what happened
is that faye was so engaged with the
memory of joan
that she may have spurred a vindictive
streak against christina and so she kind
of took out all that bottled up rage
on the effigy of christina which is why
you got all this aggression i think well
there was an initial wave of critics who
hailed her performance
it didn't take long for the public
perception to swing the other way
going down as one of the best bad
performances of all time a serious
actress like faye dunaway did not cotton
to that idea she blamed the director for
not reeling her back she blamed the
editors and the producers for taking her
depiction of a
window into a tormented soul and making
it camp she blamed christina and her
husband she blamed christina's book and
worst of all she blamed her audience for
not taking away her intended
interpretation though she has come
around to the unforeseen fandom of the
film
but still doesn't quite get
what they see in it because make no
mistake there is a fandom around this
moving picture little did dunaway know
she had opened the floodgates to a whole
fandom that had only until then existed
in burlesque shows a fandom that upon
the movie's release would hang christina
crawford in effigy
mommy dearest
legitimized a whole group of audiences
and creators who were going to do what
dunaway did
but do it on purpose
with or without the ghost of joan
crawford
believe it or not studio heads rarely
know what they're doing which is how you
can have money catapulted at projects
like cleopatra or mommy dearest
and especially in the case of the latter
all that ends up doing is giving an
inflated budget to the kind of
overwrought and overacted content that
you would get in what is considered b
cinema and especially if that high
budget b movie pulls in an audience
creators who love be cinema
are going to feel very validated like
quentin tarantino growing up on martial
arts movies and then getting to make one
of his own with a hollywood budget and
kill bill could also be described as
camp for any number of reasons but when
it specifically came to feminine-centric
burlesque aesthetic the 1980s opened a
lot of doors to have producers approve
movies with
more obvious camp sensibilities
nothing about a movie that was
exclusively made to ape off of the
success of a board game implies that
said movie would end up becoming a camp
milestone but here we are in 1985
paramount pictures distributed clue the
movie which yes
is directly inspired by the board game
and they didn't really seem to care what
it was as long as there was a movie
based on it the qualifications for
meeting the outline parameters were
incredibly vague which could have gone
one of two ways either you get a movie
that follows the path of least
resistance and you end up with a product
that is phenomenally lackluster and
lifeless or you hand it to a bunch of
enthusiastic creatives who really want
to use that lack of specifics to play
around with what they can do and really
when you're told you have to make a
movie about a murder with a collection
of arbitrary if not otherwise entirely
mundane objects in a fabulous mansion
with secret passages with a number of
outrageous murder suspects if you're not
feeding into the natural absurdity then
you're not doing your job clue the board
game is focused around up to six players
named after colors there are nine rooms
in the mansion and six murder weapons
the premise is that mr body the
fabulously wealthy estate owner is
murdered at a party attended by all the
suspects each suspect weapon and room
has a corresponding card each group is
shuffled and one from each is selected
and put in an envelope to be revealed at
the end of the game players move their
selected token around the board going to
each room looking for clues at any time
after viewing any number of clue cards
not in the envelope a player can make a
guess at which three cards are in the
envelope to win a player must guess all
three correctly if the guess is wrong
the player loses by default and is
removed from the game in-game lore is
that
they're murdered by the real murderer
clue the movie features references to
every single facet of the game including
corresponding secret passages saying
each room by name and having each murder
weapon included the primary difference
is the addition of several characters
wadsworth the butler played by tim curry
yvette the maid the cook the cop the
motorist and the singing telegram girl
wadsworth and yvette specifically add an
extra element to the story as they
function as the rule book they explain
to the players what this game is another
difference is that mr body is not the
only body nearly everyone added to the
plot is there to get murdered with a
different murder weapon the way it goes
is that six guests who seem to have no
relation to each other are invited to mr
body's mansion for reasons unknown
presumably some costume party they are
told to only use provided monikers
colonel mustard mrs white mrs peacock mr
green professor plum and miss scarlet
wadsworth guides them through the rules
of the evening's festivities and after
introductions reveals that he has
brought them here because they are all
connected to their absent host mr body
though none of them know mr body
directly he has been secretly
blackmailing all of them and wadsworth
wants them to join together to testify
against mr body and have him arrested mr
boddy shows up prepared for this mutiny
and has brought with him a number of
murder weapons and proposes that instead
they murder wadsworth and save
themselves the public disgrace however
the lights go out and mister body is
murdered before the lights come back on
and then the plot gets too deliberately
convoluted to release an opposite size
they need to figure out who killed mr
body before the police arrive but then
people
keep dying and nobody out of the core 7
can figure out who's doing it so they
all split up to search the manor in
pairs for the murderer before concluding
that the murderer is in fact one of them
all the while new people are showing up
at the house and also being murdered
this movie racks up quite the mr body
count the film is less about plot and
more about giving some of these
outrageous personalities the chance to
interact with each other you've got war
criminals and embezzlers a phone service
madam a black widow who allegedly killed
her husband a professor on thin ice for
having relations with his students and a
gay man so it's like the republican
national convention the film's plot is
also a parody of mccarthyist communist
witch hunts and a juxtaposition of true
american morality being upheld by this
reviled group of people and to top off
the sunday when the film was released
they shot three endings and shipped out
versions to theaters at random there was
no way to be sure which ending which
theater was getting two of the endings
incriminated either miss scarlett or mrs
peacock but the third true ending
revealed that wadsworth was the real mr
body and that he brought them all there
to cover his tracks and help him erase
his evidence however it turns out mr
green the gay one was an undercover fbi
agent and kills mr body now
like martha baby jane and eve harrington
camp is used to highlight the
ridiculousness of social conventions in
this instance though it's on purpose but
the primary reason why this movie gets
remembered is because of this cast of
characters specifically these horrible
women who in spite of being horrible to
slay
in all cases literally actually the
differences from the aforementioned
examples is that clue does not make any
attempt to tone down these characters
they were deliberately comedic and what
made them entertaining revolved around
distilling the most outrageous elements
of them and making that the whole
character start with outrageous
personalities and then build the world
and plot to match that energy the
shenanigans that are considered
normal in this world fit
because everyone is living in it if
everyone's absurd then absurd is the new
normal what also helped is that each
caricature is built around a specific
expression of gender and so gender
becomes the highlight of each character
which is how you ended up with a cast
that more or less focused upon a
collection of very heightened women and
tim curry and a supposedly gay character
which is what gave the gays something to
latch on to i hated her
so
much it the it flame flames flames
on the side of my face and while clue
has its underground cult of queer fans
who know this is a
much better 80s comedy than the
reagan-era jerk-off fest that was
ghostbusters the movie did not make its
money back at the box office part of the
reason may have been the studio
overspending on a movie based on a board
game that mystery isn't so hard to
figure out
for the longest time campy movies were
stuck to small budgets
and while it may have been because of
mommy dearest that they began to get
pulled into the mainstream
they struggled to perform well among
mainstream audiences in theaters as
mentioned with clue but that isn't to
say that there
weren't times when they did turn a
profit and times that they did start
getting handed substantial budgets and
starring actors who were once again
hot off of oscar wins believe it or not
actors are people too which means a lot
of them don't mind being in frivolously
fun movies they get to chew the scenery
like fae but in a film environment that
won't hurt their career because the
movie was never meant to be taken
seriously acting can be fun but it's a
bit of a drag if every role you do is
choosing between which of your children
should die in a concentration camp yeah
you'd be kidding yourself if i wasn't
going to find a reason to talk about
death becomes her and meryl streep it
takes a lot of talent to make bad acting
look this good because it's not just
about being a bad actor or giving a
deliberately bad performance everyone in
a scene needs to be collectively
developing the sensibilities they want
to project if you have an over-the-top
character acting off of a wooden
character it's just not going to be
entertaining there are popular comedies
where everyone is completely wooden like
napoleon dynamite if anyone remembers
there really i'm not sure why it made
such a splash
maybe i'm just gay i don't know if
everyone is acting with the same kind of
badness then it generates a world state
that the audience can take for granted
and engage with and people who act
normal are the odd ones look i'm cold
i'm wet and i'm just plain scared i'm
here nothing to worry about
i was actually tempted to talk about
rocky horror as a case study in this one
but
there's enough there that it's gonna
have to have its own video anyway death
becomes her star's meryl streep after
she had already won two academy awards
and goldie hawn who had already won one
both had been receiving nominations
since the 70s han was markedly more of a
comedic actress and meryl herself was
taking a turn toward more lighthearted
material as she moved into her 40s the
film was also meant to feature carrie
fisher a good friend of meryl streep
streep starred in postcards from the
edge two years prior a movie based on
fisher's autobiographical book of the
same name it was an ambiguously
fictionalized account of fisher's own
experience with rehab and her own mother
she refused to specify which elements of
the story were based on fact and which
were fictionalized
for reasons you only remember the bad
stuff don't you
what about the big band that i got to
play at that party do you remember that
no you only remember that my skirt
accidentally twirled up
and you weren't wearing any underwear
well but carrie's role was cut from the
story to save time she was also cast as
miss scarlet and clue but had to drop
out of the role when she was admitted to
rehab don't do drugs kids anyway without
carrie meryl an actress who had come up
via the stage was nearly driven to the
brink of madness due to the struggle she
had while working with the special
effects something princess leia would
have probably been able to help her with
because though critics didn't really get
the movie the special effects were
cutting edge for the time
yes no death becomes her fits all the
stops of camp's sensibilities to a
science it's vapid conceited
feminine-centric over-acted and goes out
of its way to try and tell you that it
has no substance but is instead a
showcase of style meryl plays madison
ashton a broadway actress who's famous
without anyone being sure why she's
famous in spite of her acclaim people
struggle to tolerate her talent enter
helen sharp a childhood friend of
ashton's played by han an author who is
engaged to a renowned plastic surgeon
ernest melville helen takes him to see
one of madison shows and though the
audience can't really stomach whatever
it is that she's doing dr melville seems
to be an avid fan sharp tentatively
takes him to meet her old friend
backstage where we see that ashton is
frustrated with the growing lines on her
face what better fit for her than a
plastic surgeon in their apartment helen
confesses that this meeting was a test
that madison has stolen every man from
her and that before they got married
she wanted to make sure that ernest
could be immune to madison's siren song
he's not as one would expect of a comedy
pushing women into excessive levels of
drama ernest's betrayal of helen pushes
her into a spiral that lasts over seven
years to articulate that she has hit
rock bottom han is stuffed into an
outrageous fat suit lives surrounded by
her cats eats icing from the can and
torments herself by watching ashton's
horrible movies madison's career in
spite of her talentlessness has
skyrocketed due to her youthful visage
assisted by her husband helen is dragged
to a mental institution where the very
name ashton drives other patients into a
frenzy because she just can't stop
talking about her madeline
and when she is reprimanded by a
therapist for refusing to let go of
madison
she realizes
what an excellent idea it would be
to eliminate madison fast forward
another seven years and we pick up with
madison and earnest ernest has been
driven to dire alcoholism and is now a
reconstructive mortician since his
career as a plastic surgeon fell through
though he is considered the best at what
he does painting dead bodies madison's
career has also all but dried up which
she blames on her aged visage they're
invited to a party for the release of
helen's new book forever young a
collection of youth and beauty tips
madison agrees to attend for the chance
to torment her once friend yet again
going to her spa for regular face
treatment and receiving an oh so sketch
business card for an elite service
madison initially blows it off but when
she finds helen is shockingly youthful
and gorgeous she is thrown into a
nosedive desperate she drives to the
address on the card a grand gothic
castle in the heart of beverly hills
which is actually not that unrealistic
the estate proprietor reveals herself to
be 71 years old despite appearing
to be a woman in her 30s or her 20s how
old would you guess i am 38
28. she offers madison an opportunity
a potion of eternal youth for a steep
fee and the promise that madison will
stage her own death after a certain
number of years she hesitantly takes the
potion and is left with a warning now a
warning
take care of yourself
you and your body are going to be
together a long time
meanwhile helen goes to ashton's mansion
and seduces her former fiance she
convinces him that they can be happy
forever
as long as he kills madison ashton she
outlines her whole plan and when it
seems like he's committed she leaves
madison returns now youthful and without
a single care in the world and as one of
those cares was once earnest she no
longer has to hide her contempt for him
in a heated argument he pushes her down
their gorgeous marble staircase but as
ernest calls helen to tell her in a
panic that he accidentally killed
madison in a way that
doesn't fit the plan madison
picks herself up and twists herself back
together when taken to the emergency
room it is revealed that she's
dead maybe my wrist i don't know but my
neck feels sort of sore what better fit
for her than a reconstructive mortician
ernest takes this as a miracle and as a
sign that he is meant to be with madison
forever perpetually fixing her up and
keeping her skin radiating that healthy
glow that only a makeup airbrush can
achieve helen
isn't a fan of the idea as it so happens
madison isn't a fan of her she takes a
shotgun from a display and blasts helen
into a fountain in the atrium taking
ernest aside madison explains how they
will hide the body while helen picks
herself up madison deduces that helen
drank the same potion that she did and
naturally the first thing she does is
read helen for filth for writing a book
about youth tips after drinking a potion
of eternal youth fake [ __ ] calling
out fake [ __ ] in eternal deadlock
there's only one way for them to settle
the score
on guard
[ __ ] you may have always won but you
never played fair oh
who cares how i played i won realizing
the fight is going nowhere the girls
settle down to have a heart to heart it
turns out the reason madison set out to
steal every one of helen's men is
because
well
madison grew up in a lower income
bracket than helen and in high school
madison thought that helen thought she
was trash and helen agrees she did think
that madison was trash they realized
that this petty squabble over boys was
never real it was just something that
they were doing to hurt each other and
that they don't have to hurt each other
anymore within five minutes they go from
literally killing each other to being
best friends girls
i'm so glad i'm gay the last time ernest
saw these women they were going for the
throat now they're best friends begging
ernest to spray paint helen into a
normal skin tone nothing to be done
about the hole in her stomach but just
means she can't wear a two-piece anymore
ernest now sees that this is not a
miracle this is a curse and that after
giving helen a fresh coat he's done and
gone but the girls come to a realization
what happens when they need a touch-up
and even if they hold him hostage what
happens if he dies so the kidnap him and
take him to the immortal woman where she
makes a pretty convincing argument for
him to drink the potion
[Music]
i mean i'm sold ernest decides that
immortal living seems cold and lonely
and then tries to escape from the castle
and then immediately finds himself at
the center of a convention of immortal
celebrities most of whom are those who
we've speculated to have faked their
deaths to escape the spotlight like
elvis and jim morrison helen and madison
chase him through the house pressuring
him to reconsider ernest chooses to fall
to his death but instead
survives and escapes 37 years later
we're at ernest's funeral with the rest
of his life he became a philanthropist
adventurer and a wonderful person
hilarious considering a point is made of
him being a republican do you know what
they do to soft
bald
overweight republicans in prison helen
and madison sit in the back of the
church bitching at each other under
their veils the minister's eulogy says
that through kindness and charity and
the people he left to remember him
fondly ernest found the secret to
eternal life the girls excuse themselves
from the surface flipping off the veils
and oh god they uh
needle each other for their poor makeup
skills and reference past injuries that
further deteriorated their bodies while
bickering about where they parked the
car and whose responsibility it was to
keep track helen
ends up teetering on the edge of some
steps with madison considering just
letting her fall but they're friends and
helen insists that they fall together
girls the film didn't do great
critically but made a tidy profit on top
of becoming a mainstay for queer
audiences i feel that while mommy
dearest typified camp on an accidental
level death becomes her is the perfect
instance of how to create intentional
badness with a budget i find a lot of
those intentionally bad movies tend to
get a little stale halfway through
because they keep leaning on the same
sensibility when it comes to good bad
movies you really need to keep switching
up the energy and leaning on plot
inconsistencies to keep the audience on
their toes like in death becomes her
when the story is retroactively changed
in the second half in the opening we see
madison as glamorous successful and
confident helen is mousy dull and does
not seem to be thriving however later on
the backstory is seemingly changed with
no prior indication madison was the poor
and unglamorous one and it was helen who
was elegant this is never addressed or
explained and in both instances the plot
was crafted like this specifically to
sell emotional development whereas
continuity
wasn't seen as important in many ways
this typifies the style of narrative
that is trying to be everything to the
point where not only did critics not see
the value in this comedy but they wholly
bought into the projected vapidity and
shallowness of the characters the film
was decried as having no substance at
all when in fact there's a strong
communicated message about gender
normativity and presentation societal
expectations and the role of women in
hollywood it's not even that hard to see
it unless you yourself are embedded in
the world that the movie is making a
parody of because this movie like all
good camp is criticizing the normativity
of society by highlighting the absurdity
of social expectations that an old man
can become beloved by all but old women
fall into obscurity this camp is funny
because it's pointing out exactly why
these social tropes are so absurd
by depicting these people as acting the
way society expects them to and you know
women like this
especially in hollywood
are
rumored to exist certainly one of the
memorable scenes in mommy dearest is the
clothes closet scene
if it had occurred i can understand why
it did
[Music]
now camp as a style of comedy was still
a bit niche
and people who weren't in the know
might not have bought tickets what was
mistaken about mommy dearest is that it
was not necessarily the film that drew
the fandom but the diva herself
and indeed a large component of camp was
rooted in diva worship and there are few
who so perfectly embody the deliberate
camp diva than the mistress of the dark
herself cassandra peterson better known
by her stage name and iconic persona
elvira a struggling actress peterson
showed up to audition for what was meant
to be a temporary gig to stand in for
vampira a morticia adams type host of a
local los angeles tv show that showed
bad cheap b horror movies elvira was a
sexy parody of vampyra who is a parody
of martisha who is a parody of the
monster ladies of classic hollywood
horror movies with each separation from
the source material each version more
honestly projected why the former woman
had a fandom until you got to elvira who
represented the purest expression of why
producers continued to carry on the
trope boobs peterson herself is a
worldly and intelligent lady who
specifically had a strong hand in
crafting the character the sexual
exploitation of the character itself is
a parody of hollywood production values
when it comes to designing women and
depicting women in general alvaro was
just
stripping away the posturing boobs and
once again we're in a place where the
straights have
no idea why the gays are so drawn to a
woman who builds 80 of her comedic
material around her cleavage without
realizing that it's because she's making
fun of the people who are too hypnotized
by her undulating memories to notice
that she's making fun of them in a
loving way of course so every week
elvira relaxed while gleefully torturing
the audience with bad movie after bad
movie popping in once in a while to let
the audience know she was in just as
much pain as they were her popularity
skyrocketed as the show started being
syndicated around the country eventually
leading to her strutting her way onto
the big screen in elvira mistress of the
dark absolute classic that must be seen
by everyone mistress of the dark follows
alvirah as she angrily quits her job
hosting a bad movie tv show when the
station's new owner sexually harasses
her she's going to start an act in vegas
but needs 50 grand to make the project
work that's a bit of a problem since
well she doesn't have 50 grand but as
luck would have it her great aunt
morgana just bit the dust and left her
an inheritance so she packs up her
fabulous convertible and heads on to
falwell massachusetts which she soon
discovers is filled with the most
conservative boring uptight bunch of
backward-thinking people she's ever met
there's a reason the town is named after
the notoriously conservative and
queer-hating televangelist jerry falwell
and here she discovers that her
inheritance
is actually her great-aunts dilapidated
house and her poodle so she's stuck in
this ratchet-ass little town until she
can sell the place the only monetary
offer she gets is 50 for a recipe book
from her then unknown uncle vincent she
agrees to sell it but before she can
things go awry almost every adult in
town decides that she's basically the
devil incarnate though the teenagers
love her the townspeople try burning her
at the stake anyway but as she has at
least a little bit of luck it turns out
great aunt morgana was actually a witch
the recipe book was a spell book and she
can harness some elemental forces using
a ring she found laying around the house
which brings a downpour that doses the
fire but now there's a new problem
because uncle vincent is actually a
warlock and he wants that spell book so
he can do evil warlock things elvira
leads the vicious old man back to her
house where they engage in a magical
battle that sets the place on fire but
elvira wins out in the end and banishes
vincent to the underworld while the
house and all the magical artifacts are
destroyed the silver lining she was
vincent's only living relative
so she gets his estate after his death
leaving her with enough money to hit the
road and start her vegas show the movie
didn't do great at the box office when
first released but has become a cult
classic for gays and horror fans alike
the obvious parallels of being an
outsider in a small town are
well obvious but became a big draw for
queer audiences not only was elvira an
outspoken ally even in the 1980s holding
fundraisers to help aids victims but she
knew exactly what being in a small town
and not being normal was like she goes
so far as inviting all the town's
teenagers over to her house to spruce
the place up transforming the dingy gray
exterior into a cascade of rainbows and
more than a few of the cast members
actually were queer because alvirah
attracts us like flies to a gorgeous
corpse she also dedicated the film to
robert redding a close friend who helped
create the iconic look of elvira but
passed away from complications with aids
in 1986.
she even named the love interest in the
film after him
since the film's release elvira has
remained an icon in the queer and horror
communities and last year when she
released her autobiography yours cruelly
elvira she revealed to the world that
she'd been in a loving relationship with
another woman since 2002 fully cementing
her queer icon status she'd been worried
about coming out for years
because she was convinced her fan base
would abandon her of course considering
her fan base is made up of horny
straight guys women and gay men with
good taste i don't think she had to
worry nearly as much as she did but
going back to mistress of the dark an
interesting tidbit of information is
that tim burton was actually in the
running to direct and was alvira's pick
for the job since he'd done such a great
job with peewee's big adventure and she
was good friends with paul rubins
pee-wee herman but tim burton didn't get
his dark campy hands on the mistress of
the dark
he was too busy to take on the job
because of two other movies first came
beetlejuice and exercise a pure camp in
and of itself
and then the camp noir classic
meow
[Music]
camp as an aesthetic
can be seen in good cinema
the thing is
you need to build an entire world from
the ground up this world needs to
visibly function on a separate set of
established laws
laws to which the visual and written
aspects relentlessly adhere this must be
a world where this manner of action and
style is projected to an audience for
whom their sense of reality is locked in
the suspension of disbelief so everyone
involved in the process needs to commit
which is probably a rule for absurdism
or fantasy rather than one exclusively
limited to camp which itself may be a
sub-genre of absurdism using these rules
there are times albeit rare
where camp sensibilities break through a
cult audience and end up being must-see
movies as is the case with tim burton's
batman movies specifically batman
returns but it's worth pointing out that
1989's batman is something i like to
describe as camp noir taking every
individual trope of noir sensibilities
and pushing it to impractical heights
design takes precedence over everything
else the bat suit he could not move in
the batmobile with the transmission that
would just get ripped out from a single
pothole the joker's singular marriage to
his clownish brand it's usually not
considered camp
because
well because it's enjoyed by straight
men and if straight men enjoy something
it must be higher than camp but it does
say quite a bit about being a social
outsider
batman returns just does it all better
i am just jealous because i'm a genuine
freak and you have to wear a mask
batman 89 was briefly the highest
grossing movie of all time and while
batman returns made its budget back and
then some it only made about half as
much at the box office and cost much
more to make batman returns though is
the one that does get remembered on
account of there being more memorable
moments and though critics lauded this
movie as being superior to its
predecessor
parents
felt this movie was a bit too dark for
their children so danny what did you
think of the movie
it was very violent it was a total
attack against kids the whole movie what
a little narc no really this movie
became a rallying cry for parents groups
this kid can read off his memorized
script that the producers fed him before
the segment sure but it doesn't change
the fact that kids movies of the day
could get very violent
not to mention jurassic park was only
one year away so parents groups can
scapegoat the violence all they like
they can target the dark imagery but
what's really going on is an attack
against what they really have a problem
with
i am cad woman
i mean catwoman was always meant to be a
little sexy and this is true going all
the way back to julie newmar and eartha
kitt and early comic books but this is a
suit that michelle pfeiffer had to get
stitched into and this is a character
that specifically used sex as a weapon
in a way that was closer to basic
instinct than adam west you poor guys
always confusing your pistols with your
prize
and yes the plot of this movie is that
batman is out to stop the penguin and
expose him for being a gang leader while
he's running for mayor such in such
contrivances the real through line of
the movie though is carried by selena
kyle her dual identity with catwoman and
the chaos that occupies her mind
burton's batman movies were comfortable
playing fast and loose with character
lore the important thing was that the
character represented the essence of
what the character in the comics was
which is why nobody is particularly up
in arms about how the first movie gave
the joker a name and a backstory and
also why they were comfortable with the
changes made to the penguin and catwoman
instead of being a street kid who
deployed martial arts and gymnastics to
carry out heists selena is an
overstressed overworked underachieving
assistant to mack shrek shrek himself
being this parody of trumpian business
moguls of the 1980s while selena is
competent in her work attempts she makes
to break that glass ceiling cut deeper
the further she reaches her apartment is
pink and bright stuffed with doll houses
frilly pillows and stuffed animals and
despite her attempt to appear as girlish
as possible in order to seem attractive
to men
she just can't bring herself to pretend
to be less talented and smart than she
is she gets home to a message on her
answering machine where her boyfriend is
dumping her because she refuses to let
him win tennis matches she also hears a
message she left for herself telling her
exhausted post-work variant that she
needs to go back to the office to do
something she predicted that she would
forget so back she goes where she alone
finds the truth of a proposed power
plant that max is trying to sell to the
city of gotham he plans to drain power
from the city to hold it hostage when
confronted by him she's perfectly fine
to keep this all under the table and be
a good little secretary but max doesn't
really seem to like the idea of loose
ends and pushes her out a window whether
she miraculously survives with severe
head trauma or whether she died and was
resurrected by cat magic is unclear she
makes her way home a zombie of herself
and by force of habit turns her
answering machine on when she hears a
message about a service offering tips
for how to seduce and marry your boss
she snaps ripping her apartment apart
she targets the soft pink things she had
collected and takes a can of black spray
paint to the walls and dollhouse she
so i raked havoc on some old denim and i
did what any girl would do
chaos
she chooses chaos she becomes catwoman
and sets out to destroy any man who has
wronged her which not only is max but
anyone who stands between her and her
plan to destroy him like he destroyed
her which includes the batman and after
an uneasy alliance falls out the penguin
too all while wearing a mask that she
feels is more comfortable than her face
not all that much unlike john crawford
selena herself is locked in a dualistic
psychological state between the woman
she convinced herself she had to be and
the wild unpredictable hedonistic and
reactionary catwoman all the while
selena goes through her nine lives for
nothing but trying to exist separately
from a man's world at a masquerade party
where bruce and selena attend without
masks because their faces are the masks
bruce tries his best to talk down selena
from outright murdering max
but criminal justice in this society
even if he did get sentenced to more
than just a slap on the wrist is not
justice for selena she uses up lives
four through eight to get that revenge
and then mysteriously vanishes
now aside from establishing an
environment where line delivery like
this is camp in itself as i was saying
i'm a woman and can't be taken for
granted
life's a [ __ ] now so am i it's kind of
a crime that this movie isn't held up as
a sleeper feminist hit from the 90s it's
very easy to read selena's murder by max
as an allegory for sexual assault
especially following her ongoing
psychological breakdown over the course
of the plot but as i alluded selena's
duality is indicative of the reality of
women against the patriarchy's
expectations of what a woman ought to be
selena herself fails at being a woman in
all respects except for the definition
of woman that she creates this woman
while dripping in femininity expresses
that femininity in a way that is neither
meek nor subservient
but is still
undeniably
peak femininity
i would love to live with you in your
castle i just couldn't live with myself
demonstrating that womanhood and
powerlessness is an artificial construct
generated by men to keep half the
population subjugated and thus decrease
the number of people who can challenge
their power so what happens when a woman
does challenge their power they kill her
again
and again
even men who are allegedly allies
simply by enforcing the systems of
justice that enforce her suppression
the male ally in turn
enforces her suppression without
intending to with gender and gender
expression being brought to the center
of attention yet obscured by character
pathos
this is the kind of thing the queer
audiences read into even if you're just
plain gay you end up doing a whole lot
more thinking about gender mechanics
simply because we live in a world that
still precludes gay from various gender
ideals specifically the core of what we
consider
masculinity so we tune into this the
reclamation and redefinition of gender
in a way that works for us
rather than suppresses us and a process
that selena survives to boot
and these are messages that resonate
with us in a way where pfeiffer's
catwoman is still regarded as the best
and which any number of drag queens will
attempt to depict but why does
pfeiffer's catwoman get elevated to a
pedestal when uma thurman's poison ivy
is forgotten perhaps tragically as i
told lady freeze when i pulled her plug
this is a one-woman show uma thurman is
a phenomenal actress who deserves better
than what she got and deserves more
recognition for the work that she's done
joel schumacher's batman films
themselves befit an entirely more
shamelessly obvious definition of camp
than burton's whereas bertens was a
highly stylized depiction linked
together with the singular artistic
theme
schumacher's batman is the death becomes
her to burton's whatever happened to
baby jane which is more than valid
but for most of his two movies nobody
really has the slightest idea what movie
they're in
it's like a collection of movie stars
were pulled together to shove their
respective brands into the film the
ending result is something so disjointed
and chaotic and
absurdly horny that it's hard not to
find it entertaining at the very least
and uma thurman seems to be the only
person who has gay friends because she
knew what was up
these films unlike the burton versions
were here to primarily sell toys sure
but artistically the intention was to
present the idea of comic book
characters because these were not
the comic book characters
what killed the dinosaurs
they say
monkey business
we've got work to do
uma thurman showed up to spill tea in a
body suit her character was constructed
around a quasi-eco-terrorist vibe with a
heavy overtone of magic dr pamela eisley
in the comics however is usually
depicted as independent especially of
male characters in the movie however she
is tied to strong male characters who
more or less run the show first
gotham
and then
the world
just what i had in mind
in conjunction with being scripted to be
subservient to a man all the while using
her feminine wiles to manipulate him she
was also juxtaposed against this
version of batgirl so while thurman's
poison ivy was a powerful lady who
served
she was foiled against the good woman
one who worked with other men and whose
plot was constructed around learning how
to ask them for permission at the same
time as doing that girl boss thing but
camp
wasn't always destined to be married to
strong feminine archetypes and
subversions yes all these films are
remembered in no small part due to the
strong queer following and like
schumacher queer creators worked
tirelessly to project camp aesthetic to
an otherwise naive and innocent straight
audience
[Music]
because camp was an aesthetic so closely
associated with drag queens and drag
culture it only made sense that you
would start to get movies about them the
public was aware that drag queens
existed though
usually referred to them as slurs and
having them depicted as anything but
punchlines was uncommon and thanks in
part to the early rise to rupaul who
somehow managed to break out of gay
obscurity and reach a degree of public
renown there was indeed a public
curiosity about drag queens and two
movies about drag queens were released
at roughly the same time now the
adventures of priscilla queen of the
desert hereafter we'll just refer to it
as priscilla to save time was released
in 1994 in australia three drag queens
one of them being a trans woman need to
go cross-country to make a career-making
performance this starts hugo weaving guy
pierce and terence stamp riding on the
titular priscilla the chrome tour bus
that will carry them across the
australian outback the group struggles
to get along amid intergenerational
tension and all kinds of road trip
hijinks however its status as camp is
somewhat difficult to explain see it's
australian which means it comes from a
very different collection of cultural
sensibilities leaning on a bit more of
what we may consider to be dry british
humor though i struggle to really say
it's british humor because for those who
have seen shit's creek or other canadian
comedies it seems like the only former
british colony that doesn't seem to
prefer dry comedy is
america dry humor is one where a given
punch line of a joke is delivered with
less emphasis in a general sense it
involves far more sarcasm and delivery
and in comedic styles a reaction to the
joke is far less important there's no
prompt to let you know when to laugh
it's kind of up to the viewer to use
their reasoning to spot when something
is funny in order to generate this kind
of comedy one requires a separate
in-world state of absurdity all
characters even the straight characters
have full awareness of the inherent
rules of this world and their comedic
responses are built around what is
outrageous by these established
standards this is abundantly clear in
one of the ultimate drag queen camp
movies
spice world and sensibilities like those
demonstrated in spice world are opposed
to more american styles of comedy where
the world is meant to be normal with a
few exceptions like phoebe from friends
but as another example i was inclined to
include the british series absolutely
fabulous this series itself is pivotal
in establishing sensibilities in the
queer community and gets overlooked for
continuously indicating that one of the
two primary characters is actually trans
femme without any character having a
single problem with it it is simply an
element of the character that is taken
for granted which feeds from the
generalized style of comedy where
characters simply don't react to the
comedic antics of other characters
within the script all individuals take
for granted that this is simply how
things are which is the difficulty when
it comes to including international camp
media
it's played so dry and straight that
north american audiences often assume
that this is simply how people act in
australia and the uk so because the
comedy is downplayed to find the humor
the viewer must be intimately familiar
with the given culture to know where the
separation lies between cultural
absurdity and emotional realism such as
in priscilla the elder queen cleaning up
the younger one after a gay bashing and
the drama revolving around hugo
weaving's character having a child
raised by his estranged former wife and
the trans queen falling into a romance
with a backcountry mechanic they meet by
happenstance to an audience expecting a
comedy to be aceventura it's not clear
when the drama ends and the comedy
begins leading many to assume it's
simply a slice of australian life the
themes of this movie don't necessarily
focus on gender so much as it refocuses
perhaps shedding the proxy of gender
discourse to develop a discussion about
queerness as a whole but having an open
discourse about queerness where the
messaging of queerness was not directed
to straight people was refreshing and
even if they are international actors
they were actors of some renown which is
also nice to see actors taking a risk
especially at the time priscilla
particularly resonates with me because
there's this kind of ending message that
says that it's perfectly okay to modify
your life to accommodate being with
other people that it's okay to lean in
to other people and that nobody should
really be expected to be entirely
independent not necessarily a queer
message but it's nice to hear that we
get so much social pressure to be
completely self-sufficient at all these
dumb little adulting things that i feel
like we don't take as much time as we
should to just let ourselves be human
priscilla made about 30 million dollars
on a budget of 2 million which with
hollywood accounting is about 26 million
dollars profit free and clear so when it
came to hollywood they thought hey
let's see if we can do that tu wangfu
thanks for everything julie newmar was
actually in development at roughly the
same time as priscilla once again for
the sake of expediency we'll be
referring to this as simply to wong vu
granted the length of these titles is
kind of camp in and of itself and
patrick swayze is marvelous in the lead
role but we could have had willem dafoe
instead part of me is a little sad about
that defoe is under consideration for
the role but apparently swayze as a test
went out with the director for a broad
daylight walk around new york in full
drag
and was unclockable this film another
road trip features two established
queens noxima jackson played by wesley
snipes and vita boem played by swayze
bringing a younger queen under their
wing chichi rodriguez played by john
leguizamo after winning a trip to
hollywood to enter into a major drag
competition they pawn the plane tickets
and use the money to buy a fabulous
convertible coupe de ville to drive to
la instead the camp here like with
priscilla is featured in how these girls
opt to do the entire trip in drag the
early section of the film alludes to
traumatic family life and an attempted
sexual assault by a police officer who
stops the working girls on the road
without knowing that there were drag
queens their car breaks down a staple of
all road trip movies and hijinks ensue
when the queens have to blend into a
small town as women because they're
never out of drag apparently chichi
becomes enamored with a local boy who
believes she's a girl or a sis girl
anyway and the other two queens become
frustrated with country living while
they wait for a replacement part for
their car through the duration of the
movie they work to improve the lives of
the locals including standing up to the
abusive husband of a woman who befriends
the group the cop who had assaulted vida
who is ridiculed by his fellow officers
for appearing to have been beaten up by
a girl storms over to the town where the
queens are hiding and demands their
heads as payment for this humiliation
the rest of the town comes to their aid
dressed in the poise of drag and chase
them off the town has a fabulous weekend
festival and their car is fixed in
hollywood chichi who had always felt so
insecure about her ability to be a drag
queen is the winner of the competition
now while this movie like priscilla
leans on camp comedy this is quite toned
down from what you would get from diva
centric examples like death becomes her
and elvira mistress of the dark it's
there but they don't lean into it as
much and this isn't to say that gay
movies didn't do camp john waters has an
entire pre-hairspray filmography which i
omitted because talking about it's gonna
have to have its own video instead of
serving up shameless camp i feel like
the filmmakers here were using the
platform to work in some legitimate
feelings and spread awareness which was
an ongoing theme of what became a weird
glut of movies about gay people from the
1990s and 2000s kiss me guido mambo
italiano in and out edges 17 etc but the
90s as a whole had a cultural aesthetic
of taking things that were not meant to
be serious and making them serious or
using frivolous framing devices to talk
about things that were
very serious
[Music]
now to close out we are going to briefly
talk about but i'm a cheerleader so
trigger warning for those who need it
this is one of the quintessential films
about conversion therapy but i'm a
cheerleader follows the story of
fictional character megan plumfield i
specify that the character is fictional
because the more you know about how
conversion therapy works
the more this feels like a horror movie
because literally everything in this
movie is lifted directly from the
practices of conversion therapists also
known as sadists unaware that she is a
lesbian she's outed to herself by her
family and then shipped off to a
conversion therapy camp the line but i'm
a cheerleader is used by megan as a
defense for her presumed heterosexuality
the argument here being that she cannot
be a lesbian because she conforms to
typical feminine stereotypes megan
becomes trapped in a secluded location
with a collection of other gay and queer
people who are out to beat the gay out
of them sometimes literally if needed
they are put through a series of
heterosexualizing activities
and often separated by gender the girls
are pushed towards home economics
cooking cleaning and feminine things in
the hopes that it will overwrite their
homosexual desires with the proper
heteronormative ones again given that
megan is a cheerleader and very
effeminate in her own right these are
not things that she is necessarily
uncomfortable with the boys by contrast
are forbidden from cooking and cleaning
instead they do manly things like
landscaping and simulated war games i
mean
when it comes to america's weird take on
like
conversion therapy rituals preventing
boys from any kind of cooking is
ridiculous like it's almost
contradictory because hot cuisine is an
industry dominated by men and i don't
really want to get into analyzing the
logic of people who isolate a few
passages from the bible as the
foundation and basis of their entire
world view but the line between boy
things and girl things has been erased
and redrawn throughout history more
times than you can fathom
heels
introduced to europe as footwear for men
so that men would always be distinctly
taller than women gender
it's a thing
sometimes anyway megan meets a girl
graham as one does at one of these
locations and it's heavily implied that
these girls would make very good
roommates but now we're getting into the
territory of why a girl like graham who
is comfortable in her sexuality would
allow herself to go through this
humiliating process as is normally the
case it's an ultimatum put upon kids by
their family and the risk is being cast
out entirely because that's what jesus
would do apparently very plain to see
why the american version of jesus was
not included in neil gaiman's american
gods and it's also not like the
conversion process only uses
constructive processes to mold and shape
gender roles and identities there are no
walls in their dorm rooms for a reason
no masturbation at night permitted and
if an attendee experiences any impure
thoughts they are encouraged to shock
themselves when caught making out late
at night two boys are reprimanded one
runs away the other is kept back and
isolated from the rest of the group
forced to sleep in a dog house the one
who ran away is rescued by two former
attendees of the camp who then take
megan and graham to a gay bar where
megan begins to feel more comfortable
with herself and who she is away from
the confines of heterosexual society
however when she's caught by the camp
she's forced to leave with graham
staying behind megan is rescued by the
ex-ex-gay men and they plan a coup to
rescue the kids before their
heterosexual graduation meanwhile back
at the camp the gendering rituals become
more humiliating
forcing boys and girls to wear skin
suits with fig leaves covering the
impure parts
they simulate heterosexual intercourse
these
proper christians
are forcing minors to engage in these
rituals
and yet we still let them call
themselves christians
let alone good people maybe this is just
a catholic in me but i was under the
impression that literally only god or
jesus or saint peter had the authority
to dictate
who was or was not going to hell and
therefore making the decision that
another human being for committing
whatever action is going to hell is
speaking in the stead of the divine
figure and thus is technically heresy
which does sin due to hell but we don't
need to get into theology right now
anyway the day is saved the boys get to
love boys and graham runs away with
megan protected by the nice gay men in
their youth shelter the movie ends with
megan's parents attending a pflag
meeting so
things are looking up now while some of
you especially those who have lived
through experiences like this may take
issue with how much of this content was
depicted frivolously the ridiculous
gender rituals were depicted for laughs
which is valid if it was depicted as a
psychological thriller
it would automatically lose a chunk of
the audience
it's simply easier to spread this
message around if it's showcased as
something lighthearted essentially trick
people into misunderstanding how grave
this subject matter is until the very
end anyway camp was used as a means to
give this movie gay appeal beyond simply
being a story about our experiences but
also to add a lighthearted angle for
straight people who needed to be
massaged into this knowledge but even
then
with this movie and the drag queen road
trips
we see camp deployed as an aesthetic and
camp sensibilities arising specifically
where there is discourse about gender
however the camp itself is toned down
once again in lieu of realism for the
sake of representation camp is used as a
sensibility to highlight the gender
discourse
but the discourse itself
was one that was meant to be seen when
it comes to all about eve it seems to be
a discourse about fame and corruption on
the surface whereas given the minutia of
the script it's really about the role of
women in show business and the options
that women in show business are given as
they age the adventures of julie newmar
the baby's afraid of a cheerleader i
mean sorry camp although i totally see
that movie the thing about camp in the
end is that it's oddly ageless comedy is
the fastest to age and the most likely
to age badly but the extremes of camp
leave it fresh for generations to come
the absurdity is a preservative
[Music]
it wasn't long before the entertainment
industry as a whole
recognized the power of camp not just as
a way to covertly bring in queer
audiences without actually showing queer
characters but as a way to bring in all
audiences
you see
camp can be
very all-inclusive if you choose to let
it be the hyper-masculinity of the works
of directors like michael bay and zack
snyder are just as campy as a busload of
drag queens just pushed in the opposite
extreme instead of making a farce out of
the femininity they make a farce of the
masculinity whether the director is
intended to or not the glistening
muscles of 300 spartans lovingly
depicted in slow motion for maximum
impact led to posters for that movie
adorning the walls of just as many gay
boys as straight boys when it first came
out the sequel was even supposed to
feature a gay couple which snyder fought
for but was overruled by the studio at
which point he left the project the
sequel instead features lena hedy in the
scene-stealing role of queen gorgo
a badass powerful woman ripped from the
mind of john waters and planted into a
homoerotic greek epic i'd argue that
this is another drag queen role that's
played by a woman and while hollywood
was accidentally turning male power
fantasies into peak camp cinema
knowing filmmakers were bringing camp
into the mainstream the over-the-top
caricature of an aged actress played by
catherine o'hara in shit's creek
knowingly took the absurdity of faye
dunaway's joan crawford and turned it up
to an 11 and then broke the dial off
moira rose former soap opera starlet
seems to exist in a reality in which the
golden age of hollywood never ended even
as she lives in a run-down motel
clutching onto her fabulous wigs and
outfits for some comfort in the chaotic
world of normalcy but this knowing camp
character earned o'hara an emmy for her
career defining performance whereas
it earned dunaway or razzie decades
before though nobody would argue that
moira and joan are the same kind of
character
the same kind of performance is given
the difference being that o'hara knows
how far she's pushing it and then keeps
pushing at the right moments but brings
it back in when needed
creating a camp character you wish you
could be friends with
instead of one
you'd flee from and of course there's
rupaul's drag race now in its 144th
season taking every possible aspect of a
camp's sensibility and making it
mainstream drag queens who were once the
camp idols drawing crowds at gay bars
are now filling stadiums as the
absurdity of a man dressing as joan
crawford becomes
not so absurd camp has always had a
loving cisgender heterosexual audience
who either discovered it through queer
friends or just happened to be heteros
with taste here on youtube cold crash
pictures has done more videos about camp
classics than i ever have and he's got a
girlfriend even anime has embraced camp
the intense masculinity of shows like
dragon ball z with the glistening abs
and queer-coated villains has an
unintentional camp factor ed wood would
cream their pants over and do not even
attempt to tell me that jojo's bizarre
adventure isn't one of the campiest
things ever created in fact one could
argue that camp is the primary aspect
that gives jojo's bizarre adventure its
primary fandom in susan sontag's
defining essay on camp she explains that
camp is a sensibility a mode of
aestheticism a private code a badge of
identity
the hallmark of camp she says is the
spirit of extravagance
it can be broad but not everything can
be camp here i disagree
because everything can be camp
if it tries hard enough and that i think
is my definition of camp
trying hard enough
putting your all into something that
others would expect little from seeing
where the limits lie and then stepping
over them enjoying your exuberant love
of something instead of hiding it the
brilliant cattiness of all about eve the
venomous shade of who's afraid of
virginia woolf
the fabulous bitchiness of death becomes
her
the beautiful absurdity of drag queen
road trips the weaponized feminism of
pfeiffer's catwoman
the voluptuous feathers and blinding
sequins of elton john the living art
projects of david bowie the boundless
genre-defying queer energy of freddie
mercury
and even the glistening muscles of 300
spartans and anime supermen it's all
camp
it's all more than just a little queer
and it's all us
we queers not so secretly define the
culture we live in no matter what the
straits think so this june of 2022 pride
month in the united states go to parties
parades events seminars protests as you
normally would
but for those of you who don't recognize
entries in this list i hope you make
some time for movie marathons by all
means watch the movies on this list but
there are so many other movies and shows
that i haven't even mentioned here these
are the cultural milestones that have
helped shape queer culture
and have helped us endure persecution
and scrutiny when the politicians and
the zealots and the turfs and the
homophobes and the hate mongers come for
us and push us out the proverbial window
we just keep getting up
we've got more than nine lives we've got
hundreds thousands millions we survived
the trauma of our own mommy dearests
and drank the potion of immortality so
we're going to be around forever no
matter how many eve harringtons try to
steal our luster no matter how many
small towns try to burn us at the stake
no matter how many fiends try to murder
us with a candlestick in the library
we're not going anywhere hell we can
take over the whole damn world
because if camp has taught us anything
it's how to make the absurd
into reality
[Music]
[Applause]
baby if you love me you become a better
man
[Music]
you really like it but you never
baby if you find it better
[Music]
foreign
me
[Music]
sexy
six
[Music]
so
you
[Music]
so
uh
okay
[Music]
do
oh
uh
you